Come down, my dear, my son, when of when, when of when,
O banwi, vauri bon, when of when, ir caste pattu enno, trai nici droi aghino,
E d'ai liam silan, no, dadi, mentra, mentra guen,
O fly, my man, is mine, when of when, when of when,
Qua iti doris ai, when of when, when lan banw rais lan ani,
Haram dan vendr vani, Haram dan naset liki, dadi, mentra, mentra guen.
I pi ar caste fun, when of when, when of when,
Qua iti vivri fun, when of when, when of when,
An rai gan naset krogen, iu barh jeba i barhen,
Acham er bina barh din, dadi, mentra, mentra guen.
I operet fo, I si, by God, ro,
Ar cry di agair wen, myre he, in haver and cry drow,
Aver quen, when of when, when, yeh, o, bin, when, bin, when,
Warg van, when, when, when, has, is, when, na, has, on, when, when, when.
I operet fo, I si, by God, ro,
Ar cry di agair wen, myre he, in haver and cry drow,
Aver quen, when of when, when, when, yeh, o, bin, when, when, when,
Warg van, when of when, when, when, when, when, when, when,
I operet fo, I si, by God, ro,
Ar cry di agair wen, myre he, in haver and cry drow,
Aver quen, when of when, when, when, yeh, o, bin, when, bin, when,
Warg van, when of when, when, when, when, when,
the 27th of May with Mr. Tommy Edmund, conductor of the Montreal Mail Voice Choir. The interview
will be in Welsh.
Recording made by Glenys James on Monday the
27th of May with Mr. Tommy Edmund, conductor of the Montreal Mail Voice Choir. The interview
will be in Welsh.
The interview will be in Welsh.
in the Welsh language?
No, no.
There were some Welsh,
some Welsh,
that's all,
we don't sing in Welsh, you see.
And there was a Welsh language, David,
I don't know if you remember,
I was listening to the Welsh language,
some Welsh,
and we gave one concert a year
with the two of us together, you see,
singing,
well, a little bit of a song,
and then singing together.
And did you sing in Welsh with the two of you?
No, no.
We sang in Welsh, but in a group.
And with the choir,
I mean, a big choir,
a big group,
David, Richard, Richard,
the choir, you see,
they didn't like to sing in Welsh.
Why did you think that?
I don't know,
because they were a bit...
There were ten or so Welsh people,
out of ten,
I think about twenty,
who started to speak Welsh,
in English, you see,
but they weren't very fond of it.
They were singing,
one or two real songs in Welsh
every year.
And, well,
I'm not going to say a little bit,
I'm not going to say much,
but,
I came out,
I came out to the school, you see,
and I was the only child in the school,
and I retired,
five years ago,
I was in Oslo, Laoghaen,
with the Irish community,
and I listened to a little choir,
there were twenty songs, you see,
and the choir started with Ewan Edwards.
And I didn't see it,
I was still on the phone,
I didn't see it,
I was still listening,
and the same thing,
I saw the choir singing,
first ten, you see,
and after a year,
Ewan Edwards sang,
and, well,
I don't know if you can see,
but I believe he was on the choir,
you see,
and I was very fond of the choir,
because they were very,
they were very eager, you know,
to sing,
and they were very fond of singing in Welsh,
and I, well, Ewan,
Ewan is very fond of speaking Welsh,
but Ewan can't,
I'm the only one who speaks Welsh.
How is the choir with you
in the Irish language?
Well, someone shows the songs,
first, they play the songs, you see,
they sing in English,
and they are very fond of singing in Welsh,
some that aren't Welsh,
because some aren't Welsh, you see,
by Canadians,
they are very fond of singing,
they are very fond of singing in Welsh,
they are very fond of it,
there's no group,
no one, no one,
comes to sing Welsh,
and, well,
I don't know if you can see,
well, they are very fond of Welsh,
and they are fond of the choir,
from the Irish, you see,
I believe they work very well with the choir,
they are the other choir.
How is the choir in the Irish?
We are eight people,
and, well,
it's a new thing,
the choir is very good,
of course, it's a bit...
I see the choir in the Irish,
it's very good,
you see, it's a very good choir.
It's a very good choir.
Do you have a little bit of a history?
No, no,
I don't have a lot of history,
I don't have
a lot of films,
I don't have a lot of films,
I only have a few films in Montreal,
in Caperhalen, in Ontario.
Yes, well,
how did you,
as a state-governer,
see yourself in the Otoak,
now in the Otoak Music Festival?
Yes, I think it's a bit like
a Quebec competitive music festival,
where the Bernaids,
all over the country,
from Lloyger,
from the Albanians,
and the Bernaids,
it's a brief over with my wife.
In Cany, now, tonight?
No, no, with the choir.
There's nothing to say about that,
but I've heard that they don't
listen like tenor soloists do,
you see.
Yes, in Montreal, yes, Montreal,
yes, yes.
When was that?
Oh, through...
about thirty years ago.
I had been in school
and I was thinking,
I was really interested in
something else, and
I was going on.
It was a new experience for me,
not only for me,
the soloists in this orchestra,
but I felt like it was time
to practise it.
And maybe,
that would be OK.
And what about the children?
You were in school,
the Bernaids, the Bernaids,
with them?
Yes, we were in school,
one of the schools,
I went to another school,
which was like,
in the south of Cairn,
we were in the same school,
the Bernaids, the Bernaids,
and the school was down
in the place,
I think, of Lom,
down in the Slam area,
you see,
in the south of Lom,
in the south of the country,
in the whole of Europe,
and Africa, you see.
And the Hebrew teacher
from the school
came to me in Welsh
and he had a lot of
Welsh songs.
And he was like,
I'm going to learn these songs
and sing a few songs in Welsh,
the great rebel
and he was singing in Welsh.
Now, back in
the year
1945, or 46,
you see,
there was a plant
that was growing,
it was growing, it was growing
and the plant itself,
a few years ago,
it was growing,
and the plant itself,
it was growing, you see,
it was growing,
and the plant itself,
you see.
Oh, thank God!
Thank God!
The cover,
I think, is very nice.
Johnnie, how long
have you been singing
since 1990?
Well, in one way
it's been a while,
a long time, yes.
In Caltan, Calentaly,
as a kind of soloist,
you see,
and with a good audience,
since I was in depression,
and I was singing
for about seven years
in Catholic music,
also.
It's a very important thing,
isn't it?
And I've been singing
for hours,
and I think I've been
singing for a long time in Calentaly,
and in 1936,
I was in the
Tend of Solos,
in Abergwynd,
but I haven't been there
for a long time,
but I've been there,
I've been to the cover of Dr. Johnnie,
I'm Mrs. Ewes, Pernille,
and I've been there,
and I've been there for about
about
1953,
Pernille and Brie,
of course,
in 1953,
and now I've been there
for about a year,
in 1954,
in Stagernes.
Well, I've been there,
I've been to Stagernes,
I've been there for a long time,
of course, I've been there,
I've been to Stagernes,
and I've been to Stagernes,
but I haven't been there for a long time,
I've been to the Pisaindrop,
not the Pisaindrite.
But that's a very good place.
But I've had a lot of
sports experience there,
but I've been
in the school
there,
I haven't been
in the group,
but I've been there for a long time,
as you can see,
in Stagernes,
but every time I go back,
I always go back to the school,
I've been in Bari, in Abertau,
in Lille,
and in...
Carpignin,
in Lille,
Bari,
Stagernes,
one of them was there.
I remember that in the spring of 1990,
in Abertau,
in 1964,
I was there.
Do you go back to Llyfann
with the Welsh again?
Not through us,
but through one of the guys
who was a bit from Montreal,
and we went down
to the station,
you see, High Street,
and it was a bit cold,
to go back down
to the stadium.
But...
I was in the train,
I was in the train to the stadium,
with the Welsh and Welsh.
How did you get to know
the Welsh
with the Welsh
in the station?
There's only one Welsh,
I don't know,
I'm not very good, you see.
Everyone says,
I'm not very good,
I don't know, I'm not very good.
What did you learn in Welsh?
How did you learn Welsh?
Oh, I learned it.
I learned it
in the school of Henry Wynne,
Dr John Hughes,
I learned it in the school of Henry Wynne,
who was the main Welsh speaker
in the school of Henry Wynne,
and I learned it
all of a sudden,
I must teach the language for cause.
There's one person in my gang,
No one島
I learned things well outside of our venue,
as a Feels Good person,
we always spoke good English,
And I'm having a good time.
I'm learning a lot of languages.
I'm learning a lot of languages in one year.
Well, I'm learning a lot of languages,
but I don't have the time to study.
I'm learning a lot of languages.
I'm going to school and play a lot of games.
And then in school, I'm learning the language precisely.
I'm learning a lot of languages in grade two.
When I'm in grade two, I'm going to school.
I'm learning a lot of languages.
Do you plan to study in the future?
Do you plan to go to school?
No, I don't plan to go to school.
And I'm going to study in the future.
I'm studying.
That's silly, that is.
I don't know that.
I'm studying in the future.
In the future.
I'm going to study.
What's that?
That's enough.
I'm going to study.
And what about me in Welsh?
Do you think I'm better than any of the other people in Welsh?
Well, the people, the young people,
I'm not sure, I'm not sure,
I'm going to study Welsh.
OK.
Was there any old memories with you from your life in Wales before coming to Canada?
Well, I started working in the club for about ten years.
I worked on the screens for about ten years.
And strikes, you know.
It was a lot of work.
Ten years, that's what it was.
It was a lot.
It was a lot of work, a lot of strikes,
a lot of work, a lot of work,
a lot of work, you see.
And well, I was studying.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to go to the strike,
the big strike,
in 1925, I studied,
and then I went to the sea.
I was there when the war broke out.
And...
Do you remember the
strike in Godrardraig when you were a child?
Oh, I do.
I remember when I was living in Pantig,
I went up to Godrardraig,
and I was watching the TV,
and I thought,
well, maybe a month or so.
The family was on their way,
you know, on their way,
down the street, playing.
And something else I remember
was that the men were very angry,
they were hanging around
with a bunch of
people on the side of the street,
you know.
They were beating them up.
Were you angry?
I think I was angry at my family.
I think.
And then I went to the sea,
and I was there,
and I saw another thing.
And I went to Pantig,
anyway,
and there it was
when there was a blast.
I looked over,
and there was a conversation.
really
it was
terrible.
I went to eat a little darling.
My father.
What a beautiful girl.
Because she was one of our
friends.